'\" t
.TH PHANSPEEDD 8 "2026-07-20" "phanspeed 0.30.2" "phanspeed manual"
.SH NAME
phanspeedd \- the phanspeed thermal/power daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phanspeedd
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phanspeedd
is the only privileged actor in phanspeed: it owns the truth about the
Dell laptop's thermal/power state \(em platform_profile, CPU package
power cap (RAPL PL1), EPP, turbo, dGPU power limit, and (Endure mission)
E-core confinement + dGPU runtime suspend \(em and is the only writer of
any of those knobs.
.BR phanspeed (1)
and every other consumer talk to it over the control socket; nothing
above the socket ever needs privilege to read.
.PP
Runs a poll loop (default every
.I poll_interval
seconds) that reads temperature/battery/AC state, arbitrates the active
profile or mission, and applies whichever thermal/power knobs changed.
An
.B emergency
failsafe forces the most aggressive cooling profile the instant a CPU
sensor crosses
.IR emergency_temp ,
latched until it falls below
.I emergency_clear_temp
\(em hardcoded logic, not disableable from the socket (see CONFIGURATION).
.SH CONFIGURATION
Config is the seed, never the master: every field is re-clamped and
every invariant re-enforced on load AND after every socket
.I set
(sanitize_config()), so neither a tampered config file nor a hostile
socket client (the socket is 0666) can ever leave the daemon in an
unsafe or crashing state. Default path:
.IR /etc/phanspeed/config.json .
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
key@default@clamp
poll_interval@3.0 s@\(em (not socket-clamped)
quiet_below@60\(deC@30\(en85
cool_above@80\(deC@40\(en90
hysteresis@4\(deC@0\(en15
emergency_temp@90\(deC@60\(en95
emergency_clear_temp@78\(deC@40\(en90
rate_limit@10@1\(en1000
power_limit_w@0 W@0, 8\(en250
power_floor_w@0 W@0, 8\(en250
battery_power_w@0 W@0, 8\(en250
gpu_power_limit_w@0 W@0, 8\(en250
intensity@2@0\(en4
.TE
.PP
.IR rate_limit " is set-commands per 10s window; the four power fields are"
0 = unmanaged/base-TDP, otherwise clamped into their range.
.I emergency_temp
cannot be raised past 95\(deC, and
.I emergency_clear_temp
is always forced at least 2\(deC below whatever
.I emergency_temp
resolves to \(em the failsafe stays meaningful no matter what a config
file or socket client sends.
.PP
Non-numeric fields, validated by type/enum rather than a numeric clamp:
.IR mode " (" auto | manual "), " manual_profile " / " battery_profile
(one of the hardware's own detected profile choices),
.IR sensor " (" auto " or a detected sensor id), " allow_uids " (list of"
ints; root is always allowed regardless),
.IR power_auto ", " battery_aware ", " gpu_persistence ", " endure_gpu_sleep ,
.IR endure_trim ", " endure_ecores ", " pin_deny_on_battery_endure " (bool),"
.IR turbo " (" auto | on | off "), " epp " / " battery_epp " (\(oq\(cq or a valid"
EPP governor string),
.IR mission " (\(oq\(cq | " cool | perf | endure "), " endure_pause_units
(list of systemd unit names, max 16 \(em stopped on battery-Endure entry,
restarted on release).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/phanspeed/config.json
Hot-reloaded on every socket
.I set
(never re-read from disk on a timer); written back by the daemon itself
after a change is applied, so it always reflects the live, sanitized
state.
.TP
.I /run/phanspeed/status.json
World-readable (0644, or 0640 when
.I allow_uids
narrows to a single owner), written every poll. Carries
.IR written_at " (epoch, lets a watcher tell a dead daemon from steady"
state),
.IR ecore_set " / " pcore_set ,
power balance, dGPU state, and the active
.I pin
(if any). Consumed by the GNOME pill and, per contract, by external
orchestrators \(em see
.IR docs/ECORE\-POWER.md .
.TP
.I /run/phanspeed/control.sock
0666, gated by
.B SO_PEERCRED
against
.I allow_uids
(root always allowed) \(em file mode and peercred are two independent
gates. Built on the vendored
.B sutra
.RI ( sutra (7))
.B ControlServer
with phanspeed's own 64 KiB line cap (\fIMAX_MSG_BYTES\fP, larger than
sutra's stock default \(em some \fIset\fP payloads, e.g.
\fIendure_pause_units\fP, run long) and a custom authorization closure,
since
.I allow_uids
is live-reconfigurable via the socket itself rather than a fixed
startup set.
.TP
.I /run/phanspeed/paused_units.json
Bookkeeping for Endure's unit-pausing lever: which
.I endure_pause_units
this daemon instance itself stopped, so release only restarts units it
paused.
.SH PROTOCOL
Line-delimited JSON, {"cmd": ...} in, one JSON object back.
.TP
{"cmd": "get"}
Returns the same object as
.IR status.json .
.TP
{"cmd": "set", ...}
Any subset of the CONFIGURATION fields above. Invalid fields are
dropped and named back in the response's
.I rejected
list \(em never silently ignored, never crash the daemon. Setting a raw
stance knob (
.IR mode ", " manual_profile )
while a mission is active drops the mission back to
.IR off ,
since a mission owns the whole stance.
.TP
{"cmd": "pin", "mission": m, "ttl_s": t, "owner": o}
A bounded lease that overrides the
.I applied
mission for
.I t
seconds without touching the persisted config. Every request is
answered explicitly, granted or denied with a reason
.RI ( pin_decision() ):
a second pin while one is held is denied naming the current holder; a
pin that would fight an active battery-Endure stance is denied unless
.I pin_deny_on_battery_endure
is relaxed. See
.IR docs/ECORE\-POWER.md "'s pin API section for the full contract and"
transport (relayed by
.I orchestratord
for remote/mesh callers \(em phanspeedd itself only ever hears from a
local, peercred-authorized UID).
.TP
{"cmd": "unpin"}
Releases an active pin early.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Clean shutdown: restore a neutral thermal profile, remove
.IR status.json ,
release any confined slices/paused units, close the socket.
.SH SECURITY
The relevant attacker is an unprivileged local process abusing the root
daemon over its world-writable socket; phanspeedd has no network
attack surface at all
.RI ( IPAddressDeny=any ,
see
.BR systemd.exec (5))
\(em the only component that ever reaches the internet is the separate,
unprivileged
.BR phanspeed\-update (1)
checker.
.TP
.B Socket
AF_UNIX, newline-delimited JSON, bounded reads (64 KiB line cap). Every
connection is checked against
.B SO_PEERCRED
\(em only root or a UID in
.I allow_uids
may issue commands \(em on top of the socket's own 0666 file mode. Two
independent gates, same doctrine as every other pill in the family.
.TP
.B Hostile input
Malformed JSON, non-objects, oversized lines, and unknown commands are
answered with
.RI { \(dqerror\(dq : ...} " and the connection ends; they never crash the"
daemon (see
.BR tests/attack_socket.py ,
the adversarial fuzz suite \(em
.BR "make attack" ).
.TP
.B The emergency floor
.I emergency_temp
is hard-capped to
.RI [ 60 ", " 95 ]
\(deC and cannot be raised away by a tampered config or a hostile socket
client \(em the thermal failsafe stays meaningful no matter what a local
attacker sends.
.TP
.B Capabilities
The systemd unit keeps exactly one capability,
.IR CAP_CHOWN ,
to hand the socket/status file to the logged-in user; every other
capability is dropped. See
.I systemd/phanspeed.service
for the full sandboxing profile (parity-checked against the family's
.BR ramsteind (8)
reference, UNIFY.md row 12).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phanspeed (1),
.BR phanspeed\-tune (8),
.BR phanspeed\-update (1),
.BR phanspeed\-healthcheck (8),
.BR systemd.exec (5)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and PhanSpeed contributors.
