.TH PHANSPEED 1 "2026-07-20" "phanspeed 0.30.2" "phanspeed manual"
.SH NAME
phanspeed \- verb CLI for the phanspeed thermal/power daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B phanspeed
.RI [ verb ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B phanspeed
talks to
.BR phanspeedd (8)
over its control socket and prints the answer. With no verb, it prints
.BR help .
.SH VERBS
.TP
.B status " [\-\-json]"
Active profile or mission, CPU temp, power balance (on battery), dGPU
state, power cap, EPP, turbo, and AC/battery.
.TP
.B doctor " [\-\-json]"
Read-only firmware/thermal snapshot \(em changes nothing. Reports the
BIOS thermal mode, turbo state, fan health, and the
.B WATT CHOKE
section: whether a software cap or a live PROCHOT clamp is limiting
watts right now. Run as root to also sample live RAPL package watts and
the staged BIOS ThermalManagement/TurboMode attributes.
.TP
.BI mission " " <cool| perf | endure | off>
The three stances, plus
.B off
for legacy manual profile/power/EPP control.
.B cool
favors quiet and low heat,
.B perf
favors clock and throughput,
.B endure
favors battery runway (E-core confinement, dGPU sleep, unit pausing \(em
see
.BR phanspeedd (8)).
A mission owns profile/power/EPP while active; setting a raw knob
(profile, or the legacy
.I mode
field) drops the active mission back to
.BR off .
.TP
.B survive
Shortcut for
.BR "mission endure" .
.TP
.BI intensity " " <0\-4| +| \->
Lean within the active mission.
.B +/\-
step relative to the current value; a bare number sets it directly.
Clamped 0\(en4.
.TP
.BI profile " " <quiet| balanced | cool | performance | auto>
Legacy manual thermal profile.
.B auto
hands profile selection back to the daemon's own temperature-based
state machine. Setting this drops any active mission.
.TP
.BI power " " <WATTS| auto | full>
CPU package power cap (RAPL PL1).
.B auto
scales the cap with temperature;
.B full
(or
.IR 0 )
removes the cap entirely.
.TP
.BI epp " " <performance| balance_performance | balance_power | power | auto>
Energy Performance Preference hint.
.B auto
leaves it alone (no override).
.TP
.B tune " [...]"
Delegates to
.BR phanspeed\-tune (8)
(needs root) \(em runs the RAPL auto-tuner that derives the AC and
battery power-cap operating points.
.TP
.B update " [\-\-check] [\-\-json]"
Delegates to
.BR phanspeed\-update (1).
.TP
.B version
Print the installed version.
.TP
.B help
Print the verb summary above.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
$ phanspeed status
mission : endure  (intensity 3/4)  \(em owns profile/power/epp
profile : quiet  (mode auto)  ← mission
cpu temp: 52°C
balance : \-4.2 W ▼ draining  ~3h12m  (in 0W, draw 4.2W)
dgpu    : asleep
cpu pwr : cap 25 W (mission)  (battery base)
epp     : balance_power  (AC cfg auto, battery balance_power)
turbo   : off
battery : yes

$ phanspeed mission perf
mission \-> perf

$ phanspeed intensity +
intensity \-> 4/4

$ phanspeed doctor
phanspeed doctor \(em read-only firmware/thermal snapshot (changes nothing)

  phanspeed   : running (v0.30.2)
  BIOS        : 1.40.0
  thermal mode: balanced  (platform_profile; choices: low-power balanced performance)
  turbo       : on  (no_turbo=0)
  fans        : CPU Fan 3200/6500 rpm · GPU Fan 0/6200 rpm
  cpu temp    : 52°C

WATT CHOKE  (the cap that crippled it before)
  software cap: none \(em phanspeed is NOT limiting watts ✓ (PL1 65 W)
  live clamp  : none detected ✓ (no BD PROCHOT under current load)
  hidden cap  : BIOS-governed (the MMIO lever was removed in v0.20 for security).
                Lift it via BIOS ThermalManagement; not runtime-readable without /dev/mem.

verdict: ✓ watt choke clear \(em phanspeed isn't capping and no live clamp detected.
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/phanspeed/status.json
The read seam \(em profile/mission, power balance, temps, dGPU state,
E-core confinement. World-readable, updated every poll. Mode 0644 (or
0640 when a single owner UID is configured).
.TP
.I /run/phanspeed/control.sock
The command socket used by every verb above. Mode 0666, peercred-gated
(see
.BR phanspeedd (8)'s
SECURITY section).
.SH EXIT STATUS
Non-zero if
.B phanspeedd
is unreachable, or if it rejects the request (bad value, unknown
profile/mission, rate limited) \(em the message explains why.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR phanspeedd (8),
.BR phanspeed\-tune (8),
.BR phanspeed\-update (1),
.BR phanspeed\-healthcheck (8)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and PhanSpeed contributors.
